Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you and happy Easter to everybody. We come to this high point of liturgical year, the celebration of the resurrection of the Lord.
You know, probably a lot of you know that I've spent a lot of my life reading texts from philosophers and religious writers and spiritual writers and writers.
Plato, Aristotle,
Confucius, Cicero, Marcus Aurelius, Anselm, Aquinas, Kant, Hegel, all these people in the course of my studies I've read.
And I love those texts.
Ideas.
You know, arguments, you know, fine inspirational notions, you know,
Um,
What all those figures have in common, I would say, ancient modern, is a...
Yeah. A kind of, you know, amusing detachment as they're talking about these high ideas. Yeah.
They're in a philosophical sort of
Calm frame of mind.
The memory I have when I was a doctoral student in Paris many years ago, my favorite spot to go is right here.
I was behind Notre Dame Cathedral along the Seine. And I would sit against the wall there. And I'd always bring a book with me and probably a book.
Baguette.
And I would read one of these people probably I was reading some high philosopher or theologian. I'd look up at the beauty of Notre Dame Cathedral in a contemplative
I'm floating in the spirit and listening to these, you know, calmly musing things.
Sages.
Well, there's all that.
And then there's the gospel
I want us to see
The contrast between
100% detached philosophical musing, as beautiful as that is. Look, I'm a philosopher. I love that stuff.
But there's a contrast between all of that and
and the Gospels.
gospel
Godspell.
It's a rendering of...
Ewan galeon
Good news
Good, good, good.
Now, Confucius, Aristotle, Plato, Aquinas, and so on, okay, they're interesting.
And they're wonderful and they're full of deep ideas.
Yeah. But it's not exactly newsy. It's not text that would, that you want to say, hey, hey, let me tell you about this. Something happened.
But then there's the Gospels.
Yes, they've inspired philosophers, and yes, they've inspired spiritual teachers. All that's true. But at their heart,
They're not abstracted philosophical musing.
They're the urgent,
Conveying,
10% of news.
Something happened.
Something.
Happened.
And I need you to know about it.
Now,
With that in mind, look at our first reading for today.
from one of Peter's speeches in the Acts of the Apostles.
He begins this way.
You know what happened
All over Judea, beginning in Galilee with the baptism that John preached. So right away, he's not like Kant or Hegel or Aristotle. He's not dealing in philosophical.
philosophical abstractions. He's not trading in mythic narrative. He's saying, hey, hey, did you hear what happened? No.
Let me tell you about this.
Jesus, this person.
And so the audience is meant to say like oh yeah yeah i i remember that
He goes on.
how God anointed
In the name of Jesus, we pray. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen
It's going to be about him.
This guy, this Jesus, whom you've heard about, maybe some of you heard him, maybe some of you saw him.
I want to tell you about him.
And then
This
Man,
God
Raised on the third day
After our leaders
Put him to death.
Wow. Now,
That's a story.
Yeah. that he was a preacher and you heard about him. Yeah. And our leaders put him to death. Well, yeah.
It's sad to end the story, I guess.
No, no, no, no. The story is just beginning.
That's because God...
raised him.
From the dead.
We're not talking about mischief. We're not talking about vague abstractions. Oh, what's the story about the dying and rising of the crops? Come on.
That's not what he's doing here. He's talking about...
This Jesus
who he knew and maybe some of you heard about him and knew him and something happened to him.
And then everyone, this line, which though I come across it every single Easter,
It takes my breath away.
He says,
He became visible to us.
Who ate and drank with him
After he rose from the dead.
Thank you.
What?
What are you talking about?
So,
God raised him from the dead.
And then he appeared to you,
And that is a ghost or hallucination or something. Yeah.
I mean they knew about that they knew about that sort of phenomenon psychological projections
Dreams go seething.
No, no.
We who,
8. And drank with him. F. rewrote from the dead.
If something happened, something happened, right?
Easter.
The resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
Now, with all that in mind,
I wanted to use that as a preparation for our gospel, which is taken from St. John's account.
of the resurrection.
um here's what struck me i've been reading this course for many many years preaching on it for years but it struck me just this ah most recent preparation.
How much running is going on in this story?
Mary Magdalene runs to the apostles.
Peter and John run to the tomb. In fact, it's emphasized that John ran faster than Peter.
Uh,
there's a lot of running going on in the story.
I don't know about you, but I can't really even imagine Aristotle or Plato or Kant or Hegel running. Yeah.
I see them sitting at a desk, maybe teaching a class in the university, maybe walking around with their disciples.
running?
Why do people run?
They run because they got something to tell you. There's something urgent going on. If suddenly I ran out of the studio, people say, hey, hey, hey, what's going on?
Oh, and I'm with him
People run.
Because they're not just trading in nice, edifying abstractions. They run because they got something to communicate with.
Something to say.
So, look now how the story unfolds.
Mary Magdalene comes to the tomb early on Sunday morning. I love the detail of this story.
It has that...
That vivid sense of something remembered.
The little details. When you're telling a story, not just an abstract sort of mythic thing, but you're telling a story about something that happened to you, you remember something.
These details.
She comes early. It says when it was still dark, so very early in the morning.
Why has she come?
Well, while anyone comes to a cemetery or a grave, she's come...
To mourn, she's probably crying.
She's come to remember.
What Jesus meant to her.
You know, she comes in that spirit.
What does she find though?
A stone?
Rolled away.
The stone, this giant stone they put in front of this cave like a tomb.
Something happened, obviously.
If something happened, who would have rolled that stone? How would the stone get rolled?
But something happened here and so she runs.
Don't just two- that strikes me
all these people were running.
They're pretty young.
You know, I mean, I ran a lot when I was a kid. Right now, running is not something I do a lot of. When you reach a certain age, you don't run. Right.
Uh,
How old were these people?
Well, St. Peter, we think, died around the year like 64, and they speculate he was in his mid-60s, which means at this time, he was maybe in his early 30s. Right.
We don't think of Peter that way, do we? We think of this old man with a long beard. John? John?
100% younger still, probably in his early 20s. Mary Magdalene running, running.
How old was she? In her 20s, somewhere?
Anyway, she runs to tell them, hey, they've taken the Lord away.
And so the two disciples run to the tomb.
you know this detail that that john outpaces him the younger john not surprisingly outpacing the older saint peter.
Yeah. It's a detail that contributed to the conversion of Graham Greene. Yeah.
You know the great English novelist?
And he said, one of the things that contributed to it was this story, right?
Because his novelist eye caught this fact that
Well, why would they have remembered that?
If they're treating in some myth or abstraction or some made-up story,
Yeah. They wouldn't have remembered. They wouldn't have put that in. Yeah.
They put that in because it was vividly remembered. Right.
If they get to the tomb, John first, but he waits, and then Peter catches up to him.
They look in.
Now Mary Magdalene noticed the stone rolled away but now they look in what do they see
Jesus is gone. The body is gone.
But the burial cloths remain.
First of all, that's weird.
Because if the body had been stolen,
Why would they bother unwrapping him?
Wouldn't they have just picked him up and taken him? They want to get out of there as quickly as possible. Would they have...
meticulously unwrap the body before stealing it?
So that in itself is weird that the barricades are there.
But secondly,
They're
It's neatly arranged, and the cloth that went around his head is rolled up neatly, it says, in its own place. Right.
First of all, notice the vivid remembrance.
It's these little details.
"'But you see what struck them is so strange.'
Let's say that the grave robbers...
took the barrel cloths off. Why would they bother arranging them?
Beautifully on the burial shelf there. Why would they fold up the cloth around his head in a neat,
It doesn't make any sense.
Something happened.
Something very weird happened in this tomb.
It says that John,
When he looked in and he saw what I've just described,
He believed.
1. What did he come to believe?
Not that someone had broken into the tomb. That was Mary Magdalene's assumption. They've taken the body of the Lord.
Not that someone had broken in.
But the far...
Weirder. Weirder.
Fact.
That somebody had broken out.
Resurrection faith
It begins in this passage.
Startling moment
When they realize
The death does not have the final word.
These followers of Jesus that loved him, they were his friends, they were amazed at him.
They were convinced he was the Messiah of Israel.
But his death on that Roman cross
And dash their hopes.
Remember the road to Emmaus story? It's all about that. We thought he was the one.
But his death on that Roman cross.
Someone's put to death.
By the enemies of Israel, there's no way he's the Messiah.
not only do we warn him
But we're mourning our own lost faith. We're mourning the fact that we've wasted these years of our lives. We're mourning because we're so deeply
deeply hurt and disappointed, all of that, all of that, every bit of that.
But when John looks in,
And he sees the empty tomb, and he sees those burial cloths.
And he comes to believe.
Someone broke out of the tomb.
Because God's love
Everybody.
Is more powerful
than death itself.
God's love
God's mercy
Is more powerful than death itself.
And this means, and now we come to the heart of Easter faith.
This means that all of our assumptions
have to be rearranged. This means everything we've assumed is true about the nature of things has got to be undone. This means the world has been turned upside down.
upside down. There's a revolution in that literal sense of a turning around, turning upside down of all expectations.
We live now in a new world.
It's the only way to understand the first Christians in their message. They are not like the disciples of Confucius or the disciples of Aristotle.
He'll say, let me tell you about this new teaching. I've... Nah, nothing as bland as that.
They're telling you the world has changed.
And that's called, to this day,
Evangelization.
You won Gellion.
Good news. Something happened.
And now listen to me
It's time for all of us to
To run!
Out to the world.
With that great message.
God bless you and happy Easter.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.